.github/pull_request_template.md, before:

**How to categorize this PR?**
<!--
Please select area, kind, and priority for this pull request. This helps the community categorizing it.
Replace below TODOs or exchange the existing identifiers with those that fit best in your opinion.
If multiple identifiers make sense you can also state the commands multiple times, e.g.
  /area control-plane
  /area auto-scaling
  ...

"/area" identifiers:     audit-logging|auto-scaling|backup|certification|control-plane-migration|control-plane|cost|delivery|dev-productivity|disaster-recovery|documentation|high-availability|logging|metering|monitoring|networking|open-source|operations|ops-productivity|os|performance|quality|robustness|scalability|security|storage|testing|usability|user-management
"/kind" identifiers:     api-change|bug|cleanup|discussion|enhancement|epic|impediment|poc|post-mortem|question|regression|task|technical-debt|test
"/priority" identifiers: normal|critical|blocker
-->
/area TODO
/kind TODO
/priority normal
/area networking

**What this PR does / why we need it**:

**Which issue(s) this PR fixes**:
Fixes #

**Special notes for your reviewer**:

**Release note**:
<!--
Write your release note:
1. Enter your release note in the below block.
2. If no release note is required, just write "NONE" within the block.

Format of block header: <category> <target_group>
Possible values:
- category:       improvement|noteworthy|action
- target_group:   user|operator|developer
-->
```improvement operator

```

Commit message:

[gardener/gardener#2462] Add nodeSelector to run only on allowed worker pools
This makes the the following components run only on pools that are allowed to host system components and extensions:
* calico-kube-controller
* calico-node-vertical-autoscaler
* calico-typha-deploy
* calico-typha-horizontal-autoscaler
* calico-typha-vertical-autoscaler

See https://github.com/gardener/gardener/issues/2462 and https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/2480

.github/pull_request_template.md, after:

**How to categorize this PR?**
<!--
Please select area, kind, and priority for this pull request. This helps the community categorizing it.
Replace below TODOs or exchange the existing identifiers with those that fit best in your opinion.
If multiple identifiers make sense you can also state the commands multiple times, e.g.
  /area control-plane
  /area auto-scaling
  ...

"/area" identifiers:     audit-logging|auto-scaling|backup|certification|control-plane-migration|control-plane|cost|delivery|dev-productivity|disaster-recovery|documentation|high-availability|logging|metering|monitoring|networking|open-source|operations|ops-productivity|os|performance|quality|robustness|scalability|security|storage|testing|usability|user-management
"/kind" identifiers:     api-change|bug|cleanup|discussion|enhancement|epic|impediment|poc|post-mortem|question|regression|task|technical-debt|test
"/priority" identifiers: normal|critical|blocker

For Gardener Enhancement Proposals (GEPs), please check the following [documentation](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/tree/master/docs/proposals/README.md) before submitting this pull request.
-->
/area TODO
/kind TODO
/priority normal
/area networking

**What this PR does / why we need it**:

**Which issue(s) this PR fixes**:
Fixes #

**Special notes for your reviewer**:

**Release note**:
<!--
Write your release note:
1. Enter your release note in the below block.
2. If no release note is required, just write "NONE" within the block.

Format of block header: <category> <target_group>
Possible values:
- category:       improvement|noteworthy|action
- target_group:   user|operator|developer
-->
```improvement operator

```
